---
template: blog-post
title: Struck From the Record
slug: /bobby-seale
date: 2020-10-28 13:34
description: Struck From the Record
subhead: The Trial of the Chicago 7 fictionalizes the stories of all of its participants. In the case of Bobby Seale, the omissions tell their own story.
featuredImage: /assets/bound-and-gagged.jpg
caption: Howard Brodie. [Bobby Seale, Bound and Gagged], Library of Congress
---

Critics are, if not quite raving about, generally enjoying The Trial of the Chicago 7. Aaron Sorkin, having learned about the 1968 Democratic National Convention from Steven Spielberg in 2006, has forged a courtroom drama from the major events of the resulting trial, where eight left-wing activists were charged with conspiring to start a riot. It’s acknowledged that the movie takes its liberties with the historical record, but the resulting writing is pointed and energetic, and the performances of the ensemble cast are said to capture the real-life bravado of such figures as Abbie Hoffman (Sacha Baron-Cohen) and Jerry Rubin (Jeremy Strong).

  Critics have had comparatively little to say about Yahya Abdul-Mateen II, who plays Bobby Seale with a seething righteousness. This is likely because Bobby Seale, despite being the most interesting character of the first half of the film, is absent from the film’s end. The National Chairman of the Black Panther party was the eighth defendant in the Chicago conspiracy trial, but in November 1969 his case was declared a mistrial and severed from the remaining seven defendants. Once Seale exits, the focus of the film turns towards the rift between Hayden and Abbie Hoffman, and the film never makes up its mind as to how Bobby Seale’s story is related to that of the other seven defendants.  
  
  Which is a shame, because the story of Seale is the clearest example of how the trial was pure political repression. The conspiracy charges against Seale were on their face ridiculous considering the fact that Seale had never met any of the seven other members of the defense before the trial. Seale was shoehorned into the trial to impede his organizing with the Panthers; to make matters worse, Seale’s lawyer, Charles Garry, was undergoing gallbladder surgery in California and his motion to postpone the trial was denied by Judge Hoffman. The judge, failing to conceal his disdain for the defendant, repeatedly insisted that William Kunstler was the lawyer for Seale; Seale in turn insisted he was not. 

As his demand for his lawyer was repeatedly denied, he began to demand to act as his own lawyer and cross-examine witnesses. Seale’s effort to defend himself was not facile; he received legal documents from Garry and an African American legal student who worked in the office of the defendants. When these demands were also met with protest by the judge, he would call him a racist and fascist. A journalist at the trial stated “.”

  Abdul-Mateen II’s scenes are some of the most engaging in the film, especially when they stay true to Seale’s defense of resistance and self-advocacy. Yet Abdul-Mateen II often substitutes righteous anger in place of Seale’s coolness, cunning, and persistence. The film does not quite convey that Seale’s actions in the trial were part of a deliberate strategy, nor are Seale’s political beliefs ever elaborated. At times Seale makes an appeal to anti-racism generally, such as when he alludes to the history of lynching in speaking to Tom Hayden, but the political goals of the Panthers – anti-poverty, community control of the police – are never broached in the film.
  
But beyond omissions, the film rewrites history to its own ends, most shockingly in its treatment of Fred Hampton’s murder. Seale is visited in jail by Kunstler and Hayden so they can break the news to him that Fred Hampton has been murdered in a 4am police raid on his house. Sorkin imagines that it is his grief over his comrade’s murder that causes him to break out in frustration, exclaiming to the courtroom audience “It was premeditated murder. Fred Hampton was assassinated last night,” an outburst which then triggers the judge gagging and chaining Seale. Fred Hampton was murdered the morning of December 4, 1969, over a month after Bobby Seale was gagged in the courtroom for advocating for his constitutional rights. If racism in the film is presenting as a timeless law of the universal, maybe it is unsurprising that Sorkin sees no harm in advancing the date of Hampton’s murder by a month. Yet by shifting the timeline, the movie imagines that Seale’s courtroom outburst was a personal expression of pain, not a series of calculated political movements. 

The film also elides the fact that Bobby Seale remained gagged and bound for three days of the trial. It was a protracted struggle, with the court marshals often reapplying gauze to Seale’s mouth and beating Seale out of sight of the courtroom audience. Seale attempted still to talk through the gag, interjecting when he felt he was being misrepresented and shouting down the judge when the gag happened to fall.  Outside of the trial, courtroom sketches of Seale bound and gagged was being disseminated as a powerful symbol of the fascism of the judge and the Nixon administration. Supporters stood in and out of the courtroom chanting “Free Bobby,” and Seale, speaking through his gag, had to assure them not to riot. After three days, Judge Hoffman came to terms with the fact that gagging Seale was both ineffective and a political windfall for the Panthers; on the next Monday, Seale’s gag was removed, and a day later, his case was declared a mistrial. The movie treats the declaration of Seale’s case as a mistrial as cause for a celebration. In reality Seale, who ended the case with 16 charges of contempt of court, was the only member of the Chicago Eight to serve jail time as a result of his involvement in the case. It is a strange conclusion for Seale, who exits the movie still gagged and never again gets to speak for himself. 

----

As a corrective, one can turn to the 1971 documentary The Murder of Fred Hampton, which both illuminates the thought of the Black Panther Party and cares intimately about the details of the assassination of the chairman of the party’s Illinois chapter. The documentarians had been following Fred Hampton through what, unbeknownst to them, were the last months of his life; with his murder, the film shifted from a portrait of Fred Hampton and his politics to a  journalistic investigation of the facts of his murder, and subsequent cover-up by the Illinois State’s Attorney and Chicago Police Department. What the film makes clear is how much of the work of the Black Panthers was simply explain themselves, correctly, to others. They offered free breakfast and Marxist reading lists to radicalize Black people, emphasized self-defense to explain themselves to white liberals, tried to convince poor whites that racism was merely a tool to divide the working class. 

The documentary shows that Fred Hampton was preternaturally good at this political education, and intimately aware of the challenges the Panthers were facing in controlling their own narrative in the courts, in the press, and in popular opinion. Seven minutes into the film, is footage of Hampton in November of 1969, holding a rally to talk about the gagging of Bobby Seale. His message leaps from the specific “physical and mental torture” of Seale, to the broader stakes of Panthers’ struggle against American fascism:

The people that we’re fighting, they’re a bunch of megalomaniac war-mongers and they don’t even understand peace ... You might murder a freedom fighter like Bobby Hutton, but you can’t murder freedom fighting. And if you do, you’ll come up with answers that don’t answer, explanations that don’t explain. You’ll come up with conclusions that don’t conclude. 

The conclusion of the 1960s marked the end of the heyday of the Black Panthers. Legal challenges in the courts, internal strife fomented by COINTELPRO, and the abandonment of their white allies after the conclusion of the Vietnam war all spelled the end for the US’s vanguard revolutionary party. The fact that The Trial of the Chicago 7 mirrors so closely the police riots of this summer is a boon to the film’s publicity, but it is a reminder of how little progress against the violence of policing and poverty has occurred since the dissolution of the Black Panthers. 

The liberal consensus of today acknowledges the deep inequality of racism while precluding any radical action towards its conclusion. From this illogic emerges the ethics of The Trial of the Chicago 7, which in its tone of broad sympathy and complete unseriousness regarding the Black Panthers, mirrors an ideology that can only invest in explanations that don’t explain. Sorkin has created a protest film ambivalent about protest, a historical film uninterested in historical fact. I am told it is a frontrunner for the Academy Award for Best Picture.
